attempting to separate out code and data checks (#624)
riscv/riscv-cheri: src/cheri/riscv-unpriv-integration.adoc

Unsealed capabilities::
When `CT=0`, the capability authorizes access to a region of memory as defined by the permissions and bounds.

[#sealed_cap,reftext="sealed capability"]
Sealed capabilities::
Capabilities with `CT≠0` are sealed against modification.
They cannot be dereferenced to access memory and it is not permitted to change the address, bounds or permissions.
Modifications are restricted to _reducing_ the <<section_cap_level, CL>> field using <<ACPERM>>.

When a sealed capability is used as a function pointer it is known as a <<sentry_cap>>.

[#sentry_cap,reftext="sentry capability"]
==== Sentry Capabilities
Sentries describe secure function entry points.
They have a <<sec_cap_type>> of 1.

They are used as the target of <<JALR_CHERI>>, which must have a zero offset for the use of a sentry to be valid.

Sentry capabilities can establish a form of control-flow integrity between mutually distrusting code.
<<JALR_CHERI>> with zero offset automatically unseals a sentry target capability and installs it in the <<pcc,program counter capability>>.

> <<JALR_CHERI>> also seals the return register, so the callee can return to the caller but cannot access the memory pointed at by the return register, and cannot return elsewhere.

Reviewer: Hrm... On the one hand, this probably should say seals *as a sentry*... on the other hand, I'm happy it doesn't because Y-flavored CHERIoT won't do that.  And in fact CHERIoT's `cjalr` seals only if `cd` is `cra`.

Reviewer 2: That's a good point, keeping it vague sounds good then

NOTE: The encoding of permissions varies with MXLEN and is described in xref:AP-field-encoding[xrefstyle=full].

.AP-field summary
[#ap_field_summary,width="100%",options=header,halign=center,cols="1,2,5"]
|==============================================================================
| Permission   | Type | Comment
| <<r_perm>>   | Data memory permission         | Authorize data memory access

> | <<w_perm>>   | Data memory permission         | Authorize data memory access

Reviewer 2: missing c_perm here?

NOTE: The encoding of permissions varies with MXLEN and is described in xref:AP-field-encoding[xrefstyle=full].

.AP-field summary
[#ap_field_summary,width="100%",options=header,halign=center,cols="1,2,5"]
|==============================================================================
| Permission   | Type | Comment
| <<r_perm>>   | Data memory permission         | Authorize data memory read access
| <<w_perm>>   | Data memory permission         | Authorize data memory write access
| <<x_perm>>   | Instruction memory permission  | Authorize instruction memory execute access

> | <<c_perm>>   | Data memory permission         | Authorize reading of valid tags and setting of valid tags

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| <<c_perm>>   | Data memory permission         | Authorize loading of valid tags and storing of valid tags
```

Maybe like this to make it clear that it does not affect things like gctag?

| <<lm_perm>>  | Data memory permission         | Used to filter the permissions of loaded capabilities.
| <<el_perm>>  | Data memory permission         | Used to filter the permissions of loaded capabilities.
| <<sl_perm>>  | Data memory permission         | Used to filter the permissions of loaded capabilities.

> | <<asr_perm>> | Privileged state permission    | Authorize CSR accesses^1^
> |==============================================================================
> 
> ^1^ ASR permission is used for additional permission checks by some instructions from other extensions such as <<cbo_inval_cheri>>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| <<asr_perm>> | Privileged state permission    | Authorize privileged instructions and CSR accesses.
|==============================================================================
```

Maybe drop the footnote here and just have it in the ASR section?

[#el_perm,reftext="EL-permission"]
Elevate Level Permission (EL):: Any unsealed capability with its valid tag set to one that is loaded from memory has its <<el_perm>> cleared and its <<section_cap_level>> restricted to the authorizing capability's <<section_cap_level>> if the authorizing capability does not grant <<el_perm>>.
+
If sealed, then only <<section_cap_level,CL>> is modified, <<el_perm>> is unchanged.
+
This permission is similar to the existing <<lm_perm>>, but instead of applying to the <<w_perm>> on the loaded capability it restricts the <<section_cap_level,CL>> field.

ifdef::cheri_v9_annotations[]
NOTE: *CHERI v9 Note:* This permission does not exist in CHERI v9, but is similar to CHERIoT's _LoadGlobal_ permission, except that any _global_ capability implicitly grants _LoadGlobal_.
endif::[]

[#x_perm,reftext="X-permission"]

> Execute Permission (X, used to authorize instruction fetch):: Allow instruction execution.

Reviewer 3: Moving this one feels like a regression to me. RWX (and perhaps C) are the most important permissions that people care about. You don't want to bury X beneath all the increasingly-obscure other permissions (LM, then all the levels stuff) IMO.

Author: ok, reverted

[#el_perm,reftext="EL-permission"]
Elevate Level Permission (EL):: Any unsealed capability with its valid tag set to one that is loaded from memory has its <<el_perm>> cleared and its <<section_cap_level>> restricted to the authorizing capability's <<section_cap_level>> if the authorizing capability does not grant <<el_perm>>.
+
If sealed, then only <<section_cap_level,CL>> is modified, <<el_perm>> is unchanged.
+
This permission is similar to the existing <<lm_perm>>, but instead of applying to the <<w_perm>> on the loaded capability it restricts the <<section_cap_level,CL>> field.

ifdef::cheri_v9_annotations[]
NOTE: *CHERI v9 Note:* This permission does not exist in CHERI v9, but is similar to CHERIoT's _LoadGlobal_ permission, except that any _global_ capability implicitly grants _LoadGlobal_.
endif::[]

[#asr_perm,reftext="ASR-permission"]
Access System Registers Permission (ASR, primarily used to authorize CSR accesses):: Allow read and write access to privileged CSRs as well as some privileged instructions.

> In {cheri_base_ext_name}, the only affected CSR is the unprivileged <<utidc>> CSR, which requires <<asr_perm>> for writing, but not for reading.

Reviewer 2: I guess we could also mention cbo.inval here instead of having it in the footnote?

=== Changes to Existing RISC-V Base ISA Instructions

{cheri_base_ext_name} extend existing instructions that are used for handling addresses so that they manipulate a whole capability.

* The affected operands change type from *x* to *c* to represent this.
* Whenever the address field of any capability is modified, it is _always_ updated using <<SCADDR>> semantics.
* Any instruction that writes back an address (e.g., <<AUIPC_CHERI>> or <<CSRRW_CHERI>>) to the destination register, writes a full capability register instead.

> These rules affect the following <<rv32,base ISA>> instructions listed in <<tab_cap_base_summary>>, and also apply to instructions added by other extensions, e.g.:

Reviewer 2: The table now only contains control flow instructions so it's not good to link to that.

Maybe just drop this link?
```suggestion
These rules affect the following <<rv32,base ISA>> instructions listed in the following subsections, and also apply to instructions added by other extensions, e.g.:
```

* Shift-and-add instructions from <<zba_cheri>>, such as <<SH3ADD_CHERI>>.

> * RVC encodings C.ADDI16SPN, C.ADDI4SP and C.MV change behavior, and encodings such as C.FSD, C.FLD are remapped so load/store capabilities.

Reviewer 2: The second part of this point is already mentioned in the load/store section, so maybe drop that? And with that gone I'm not sure it makes much sense to keep this as a listing instead of just a paragraph.
